SOURCE: https://iitj.ac.in/mechanical-engineering/en/undergraduate-program

Undergraduate Program | Mechanical Engineering | IIT Jodhpur ###147852369$$$_RedirectToLoginPage_%%%963258741!!! Undergraduate Program Department Vision Reckoned as one of the most versatile engineering disciplines, Mechanical Engineering virtually touches every aspect of modern life, from mobile phones and biomedical devices to aircrafts and power plants. It is concerned with technological advancements through the development of products, processes, and power, at scales ranging from nano-scale to large and complex systems. Mechanical Engineering principles and skills are involved at some stage during the conception, design, development, and manufacture of every human-made object. While design and manufacturing involve the design of mechanisms and the analysis of materials, thermo-fluid systems include methods of energy conversions, heat transfer, and fluid flow. Future innovations crucial to the country’s growth will always have their roots in the world of mass, motion, forces, and energy- the world of mechanical engineers. At IIT Jodhpur, mechanical engineers are therefore trained, educated, and positioned, in a way not only to adapt but to define direct change. This is reflected in the portfolio of current activities of the department. Our faculty are involved in a wide range of projects in the areas of Energy conversion and power systems, heat transfer and fluid mechanics, mechanics of solid, mechanical vibrations, robotics, autonomous unmanned vehicles, design optimization, acoustics and noise control, control systems, rotor dynamics, micro-nano materials and applications, biomechanics, bio-inspired thermofluids, fluid structure interaction, etc. to name a few. Additionally, efforts are being made to introduce advanced concepts like smart manufacturing, Industry 4.O, applications of artificial intelligence (AI), machine learning algorithms, sensors, and IoT as a part of solving mechanical engineering problems. Keeping a balance between theory and hands-on experience, the department intends to provide its students with a solid foundation in core as well as emerging areas of mechanical engineering by inspiring critical thinking and nurturing problem-solving skills. The department currently offers B.Tech in Mechanical Engineering. A wide range of specialization related courses is currently offered. Students also undergo B.Tech projects from the second year onwards to develop analytical skills and gain hands-on experience. Keeping a balance between theory and hands-on experience, the department intends to provide its students with a solid foundation in core as well as emerging areas of mechanical engineering by inspiring critical thinking and nurturing problem-solving skills. The curriculum offers flexibility to students for pursuing capability-linked specializations of their choice, namely, Micro-Nano Engineering, Energy Engineering, Design Engineering, Smart Manufacturing. UG program image Programs The salient features of different UG programs run by the Department of Mechanical Engineering are as follows: Regular B.Tech. Duration: 4 years Emphasis on core mechanical subjects. Last semester dedicated to industrial training and projects. Possibility of engineering science students to choose mechanical stream as their specialization. B.Tech. with specialization Duration: 4 years Department Specialization: Micro nano-engineering, Energy engineering, Design engineering, Smart manufacturing. Interdisciplinary: Entrepreneurship or management, Smart healthcare, Artificial intelligence, Robotics, and mobility systems. B.Tech. - M.Tech. Program Duration: 5 years Double degree aligned to specialization or minor area. Possibility of obtaining B.Tech and M.Tech double degree within 5 years of induction to the program UG program image Key Objectives Enabling students to have a fundamental understanding of the core concepts of Mechanical Engineering Developing analytical and computational ability with experimental skills to create individuals competent in professional engineering practices Stimulating critical thinking towards the application of mechanical engineering concepts in interdisciplinary problem solving Fostering students to advanced concepts like AI & ML, Industry 4.0, and IoT for product and system design Inculcating an attitude towards the commitment to engineering ethics, leadership qualities, and professional development. New Skillsets Targeted Multi- and interdisciplinary approach Computer-aided design/modeling software/additive and smart manufacturing Latest industrial pursuits in the areas of automation, robotics, and smart scientific computing, microfluidics, hybrid and electric automotive vehicles Design and experimental validation of computational designs in the fields of alternative energies Advanced materials selection techniques Advanced mechanical testing and characterization techniques Familiarity with advanced and futuristic scientific computing techniques Graduate Attributes Graduates of the B.Tech program in Mechanical Engineering will have: Strong understanding of fundamentals of Thermofluids, Mechanical Design, and Manufacturing (Processes and Systems) Ability to apply mechanical engineering principles to address challenges in real-life problems through creative interdisciplinary thinking Ability to use different simulation and computational tools for a better understanding and designing of mechanical processes/systems Capability to appreciate the use of some of the advanced concepts like AI & ML, Robotics, Industry 4.0, IoT in Mechanical Engineering applications Awareness of grassroots problems of the society and the ability to provide technological solutions of sustainable nature. 6. Entrepreneurial spirit to undertake disruptive innovations Skills to communicate engineering concepts and ideas to peers in written or oral forms Commitment to professional ethics and have humanitarian engineering skills. Learning Outcomes The graduates of the B.Tech. program in Mechanical Engineering will: Gain a strong understanding of mathematics, science, and engineering fundamentals of mechanical engineering Be able to design and conduct experiments as well as to analyze and interpret data Be introduced to concepts including engineering design / optimization / sensors fabrication / computational methods / simulation tools / thermal systems / refrigeration / heat transfer/ fluid flows/ nanomaterials/ AI/ IoT/ Smart Computing for various applications Have the ability to design a mechanical system, component, or process tailored to meet desired needs under socio-economic and environmental constraints Be exposed to common problems that are prevalent in the domains of energy storage, systems and devices, clean energy, and nano-materials, futuristic technology, and advanced scientific computation methods, allowing them to innovate and develop technological solutions for the same Receive effective, hands-on laboratory training as a part of laboratory courses and short-term research projects Develop their communication skills by participating in classroom presentations, seminars, and workshops on manuscript/patent writing/presentation skills Highlights Click here to download details of the UG program. (Download file) Click here to download the latest UG brochure. Important links CCCD @ IITJ Recruitment Correspondence RTI Tenders Techscape Contact Old Website NCCR Portal How To Reach IITJ Institute Repository Donations Web Policy Web Information Manager Feedback CERT-IN Help NIRF Internal Committee Intranet Links Copyright © 2025 All Rights Reserved | This Portal is Owned, Designed, and Developed by Digital Infrastructure & Automation , IIT Jodhpur. N.H. 62, Nagaur Road, Karwar, Jodhpur - 342030, Rajasthan (India) For any comments/enquiries/feedback, please email the WIM . Last Updated : 18 Mar 2026 - 05:34 PM ###147852369$$$_RedirectToLoginPage_%%%963258741!!! arrow_downward ️